

Sisters and Brothers of America,

It fills my heart with joy unspeakable to rise in response to the warm and cordial welcome you have given me. I thank you in the name of the most ancient order of monks in the world; I thank you in the name of the mother of religions; and I thank you in the name of millions and millions of Hindu people of all classes and sects.

I am proud to belong to a religion which has taught the world both tolerance and universal acceptance. We believe not only in universal tolerance but we accept all religions as true. I am proud to belong to a nation which has sheltered the persecuted and the refugees of all religions and all nations of the earth. I am proud to tell you that we have gathered in our bosom the purest remnant of the Israelites, who came to southern India and took refuge with us when their holy temple was shattered to pieces by Roman tyranny. I am proud to belong to the religion which has sheltered and is still fostering the remnant of the grand Zoroastrian nation.

I will quote to you, brethren, a few lines from a hymn which I remember to have repeated from my earliest boyhood: “As the different streams having their sources in different places all mingle their water in the sea, so, O Lord, the different paths which men take, through different tendencies, various though they appear, crooked or straight, all lead to Thee.”

The present convention, which is one of the most august assemblies ever held, is in itself a vindication of the wonderful doctrine preached in the Gita: "Whosoever comes to Me, through whatever form, I reach him; all men are struggling through paths which in the end lead to Me."

Sectarianism, bigotry, and its horrible descendant, fanaticism, have long possessed this beautiful earth. They have filled the earth with violence, drenched it often and often with human blood, destroyed civilization, and sent whole nations to despair. Had it not been for these terrible demons, human society would be far more advanced than it is now.

I fervently hope that the bell that tolled this morning in honor of this convention may be the death-knell of all fanaticism, of all persecutions with the sword or with the pen, and of all uncharitable feelings between persons wending their way to the same goal.

From the high spiritual plane of the Vedanta, we see the same truth reflected in all religions. We do not merely tolerate other religions, we accept them all as true. The Hindu may have failed to conquer the world with the sword, but he did so with spirituality, embracing unity in diversity and harmony in difference.

Let this gathering be a beginning, a spiritual bond of humanity, a witness to the power of love, unity, and truth.

---

Would you like this version formatted as a printable speech or poster?
